This animation explains requirements for maneuvering
clearances at doors in the ADA and ABA Standards.
Door maneuvering clearances provide space
so that people with disabilities, including
those who use wheelchairs, can approach and
open doors and proceed through doorways.
Door maneuvering clearances are sized according
to the approach direction and the swing of
the doors.
For most approaches, including a forward approach
as shown here, space is required beyond the
latch side of doors.
This provides room for optimum positioning
at door hardware.
A latch side clearance of at least 18 inches
is required on the pull side for forward approaches.
The clearance must be at least 60 inches deep.
Projections into door clearances obstruct
maneuvering.
Fixed objects such as shelves cannot protrude
into the required clearance anywhere along
the full height.
Mobility aids vary greatly in their design
and size.
Many people use power chairs, scooters, and
other alternatives to standard manual wheelchairs.
Providing additional clearance beyond the
minimum specified will accommodate a broader
range of devices, including larger models,
by allowing more positioning and maneuvering
space.
Maneuvering clearances also serve people who
use crutches, walkers, canes, and other mobility
aids.
As with wheelchair access, specified clearances
provide room for effective positioning at
doors.
The maneuvering clearance is required to be
flush with the wall.
An offset up to 8 inches from the face of
door is permitted.
Where an offset would exceed 8 inches, such
as at deeply recessed doors, the maneuvering
clearance must be located 8 inches maximum
from the plane of the door and be sized for
a forward approach.
Less space is needed on the push side of doors
than on the pull side.
Maneuvering space on the push side for a forward
approach must be at least 48 inches deep.
A minimum 12-inch clearance is required on
the latch side of doors that have both a closer
and a latch.
This additional clearance allows easier maneuvering
through doors against the force of closers.
If a door does not have both a closer and
a latch, no additional clearance beyond the
opening is required on the latch side.
Negotiating thresholds while proceeding through
doorways can be a challenge, especially where
doors have closers.
Thresholds are limited to a height of one
half inch, and their edges must be properly
beveled.
Thresholds no higher than a quarter inch can
have straight edges.
Mobility aids, including wheelchair footrests,
are sometimes used to help push or prop open
doors.
For this reason, the bottom surface of doors
on the push side must be smooth to a height
of at least 10 inches.
Applied kick plates can be used to help protect
door surfaces.
The Standards also specify maneuvering clearances
for side approaches.
Hinge side approaches on the pull side require
more space than most other approaches due
to the maneuvering required.
All maneuvering clearances are illustrated
in the Standards.
Maneuvering clearances are dimensioned based
on the approach direction, the swing of the
door, and, in some cases, the presence of
a closer or latch.
At doors in series, a separation of at least
48 inches between the swing of doors provides
space to get through one door before encountering
the next.
This required separation also applies where
doors swing away from or toward each other.
Maneuvering clearances are required at each
accessible door, but they can overlap.
At entry alcoves, it is beneficial, though
not required, to provide wheelchair space
beyond the swing of doors.
As with doors in series, this provides enough
space to clear one door before proceeding
to the next.
Exterior doors can be difficult to open due
to the weight of doors, wind loading, air
pressure, and other factors.
While the force to open interior doors cannot
exceed 5 pounds, a maximum opening force is
not specified for exterior doors.
Automating entrance doors is very helpful
although it is not required by the Standards.
If doors are not automated, closers should
be adjusted to the minimum necessary for positive
latch.
Controls for automated doors must comply with
specifications for operable parts, including
clear floor space.
This space must be located outside the swing
of doors.
Controls should be located so that users can
conveniently proceed through activated doors.
If space at the control is incorrectly located
within the door swing, users must hurry out
of the way to avoid getting hit by the door.
Locating the control away from the door on
an adjacent wall, as shown here, or on a post
is beneficial because it provides clear floor
space beyond the door swing and allows a convenient
reach to the control and continuous forward
travel through the doorway.
Further guidance on accessible doors and other
requirements in the ADA and ABA Standards
is available from the U.S. Access Board.
This animation was developed by the U.S. Access
Board in cooperation with the federal agencies
that issue the ADA and ABA Standards.